README.md, before:

# ZUGFeRD/XRechnung/Factur-X

[![Latest Stable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/horstoeko/zugferd/v/stable.png)](https://packagist.org/packages/horstoeko/zugferd) [![Total Downloads](https://poser.pugx.org/horstoeko/zugferd/downloads.png)](https://packagist.org/packages/horstoeko/zugferd) [![Latest Unstable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/horstoeko/zugferd/v/unstable.png)](https://packagist.org/packages/horstoeko/zugferd) [![License](https://poser.pugx.org/horstoeko/zugferd/license.png)](https://packagist.org/packages/horstoeko/zugferd) [![Gitter](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)](https://gitter.im/horstoeko/zugferd)

[![CI (Ant, PHP 7.3)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php73.ant.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php73.ant.yml) [![CI (Ant, PHP 7.4)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php74.ant.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php74.ant.yml) [![CI (PHP 8.0)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php80.ant.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php80.ant.yml) [![CI (PHP 8.1)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php81.ant.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php81.ant.yml)

## Table of Contents

- [ZUGFeRD/XRechnung/Factur-X](#zugferdxrechnungfactur-x)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [License](#license)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Further information](#further-information)
  - [Dependencies](#dependencies)
  - [Installation](#installation)
  - [Usage](#usage)
    - [Configuration](#configuration)
    - [Reading a xml file](#reading-a-xml-file)
    - [Reading a pdf file with xml attachment](#reading-a-pdf-file-with-xml-attachment)
    - [Writing a xml file](#writing-a-xml-file)
    - [Writing a pdf file with attached xml file](#writing-a-pdf-file-with-attached-xml-file)

## License

The code in this project is provided under the [MIT](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT) license.

## Overview

With `horstoeko/zugferd` you can read and write xml files containing electronic invoice data in the Minimum-, Basic-, EN16931-, Extended- and XRechnung Profile. In addition, it is possible to attach the XML data to an existing PDF file, which was created from an ERP system, for example. If both an XML file (or XML string) and a PDF file (or a PDF in the form of a string) exist, then a compliant PDF file with attachment can be created using the `ZugferdDocumentPdfMerger` class.

**The advantage of this library is that you don't have to worry about whether a particular XML element exists in a desired profile - you can use the same program code for all supported profiles.**

## Further information

* [ZUGFeRD](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZUGFeRD) (German)
* [XRechnung](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/XRechnung) (German)
* [Factur-X](http://fnfe-mpe.org/factur-x/factur-x_en) (France)

## Dependencies

This package makes use of

- [JMS Serializer](http://jmsyst.com/libs/serializer)
- [Xsd2Php](https://github.com/goetas-webservices/xsd2php)
- [FPDF](https://github.com/Setasign/FPDF)
- [FPDI](https://github.com/Setasign/FPDI).

## Installation

There is one recommended way to install `horstoeko/zugferd` via [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/):

* adding the dependency to your ``composer.json`` file:

```js
  "require": {
      ..
      "horstoeko/zugferd":"^1",
      ..
  },
```

## Usage

For detailed eplanation you may have a look in the [examples](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/tree/master/examples) of this package and the documentation attached to every release.

### Configuration

By means of the `ZugferdSettings` class it is possible to control various options for XML and PDF generation:

```php
public static function getAmountDecimals(): int
```

Returns the currently configured number of decimal places for amount fields _(Default: 2)_.

```php
public static function setAmountDecimals(int $amountDecimals): void
```

Set the number of decimal places for amount fields.

```php
public static function getQuantityDecimals(): int
```

Returns the currently configured number of decimal places for quantity fields _(Default: 2)_.

```php
public static function setQuantityDecimals(int $quantityDecimals): void
```

Set the number of decimal places for quantity fields.

```php
public static function getPercentDecimals(): int
```

Returns the currently configured number of decimal places for percentage fields _(Default: 2)_.

```php
public static function setPercentDecimals(int $percentDecimals): void
```

Set the number of decimal places for percentage fields.

```php
public static function getDecimalSeparator(): string
```

Returns the currently configured character for the decimal separator. _(Default: .)

```php
public static function setDecimalSeparator(string $decimalSeparator): void
```

Set the character to use as the decimal separator.

```php
public static function getThousandsSeparator(): string
```

Returns the currently configured character for the thousands separator. _(Default: Empty)_

```php
public static function setThousandsSeparator(string $thousandsSeparator): void
```

Set the character to use as the thousands separator.

### Reading a xml file

The central entry point to read XML data is the class `ZugferdDocumentReader`. Among other things, this provides methods for reading header and line information, as can be seen in the following example:

```php
use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdDocumentReader;

$document = ZugferdDocumentReader::readAndGuessFromFile(dirname(__FILE__) . "/xml/factur-x.xml");

$document->getDocumentInformation($documentno, $documenttypecode, $documentdate, $invoiceCurrency, $taxCurrency, $documentname, $documentlanguage, $effectiveSpecifiedPeriod);

echo "\r\nGeneral document information\r\n";
echo "----------------------------------------------------------------------\r\n";
echo "Profile:               {$document->profileDefinition["name"]}\r\n";
echo "Profile:               {$document->profileDefinition["altname"]}\r\n";
echo "Document No:           {$documentno}\r\n";
echo "Document Type:         {$documenttypecode}\r\n";
echo "Document Date:         {$documentdate->format("Y-m-d")}\r\n";
echo "Invoice currency:      {$invoiceCurrency}\r\n";
echo "Tax currency:          {$taxCurrency}\r\n";

if ($document->firstDocumentPosition()) {
    echo "\r\nDocument positions\r\n";
    echo "----------------------------------------------------------------------\r\n";
    do {
        $document->getDocumentPositionGenerals($lineid, $linestatuscode, $linestatusreasoncode);
        $document->getDocumentPositionProductDetails($prodname, $proddesc, $prodsellerid, $prodbuyerid, $prodglobalidtype, $prodglobalid);
        $document->getDocumentPositionGrossPrice($grosspriceamount, $grosspricebasisquantity, $grosspricebasisquantityunitcode);
        $document->getDocumentPositionNetPrice($netpriceamount, $netpricebasisquantity, $netpricebasisquantityunitcode);
        $document->getDocumentPositionLineSummation($lineTotalAmount, $totalAllowanceChargeAmount);
        $document->getDocumentPositionQuantity($billedquantity, $billedquantityunitcode, $chargeFreeQuantity, $chargeFreeQuantityunitcode, $packageQuantity, $packageQuantityunitcode);

        echo " - Line Id:                        {$lineid}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Name:                   {$prodname}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Description:            {$proddesc}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Buyer ID:               {$prodbuyerid}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Gross Price:            {$grosspriceamount}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Gross Price Basis Qty.: {$grosspricebasisquantity} {$grosspricebasisquantityunitcode}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Net Price:              {$netpriceamount}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Net Price Basis Qty.:   {$netpricebasisquantity} {$netpricebasisquantityunitcode}\r\n";
        echo " - Quantity:                       {$billedquantity} {$billedquantityunitcode}\r\n";
        echo " - Line amount:                    {$lineTotalAmount}\r\n";

        if ($document->firstDocumentPositionTax()) {
            echo " - Position Tax(es)\r\n";
            do {
                $document->getDocumentPositionTax($categoryCode, $typeCode, $rateApplicablePercent, $calculatedAmount, $exemptionReason, $exemptionReasonCode);
                echo "   - Tax category code:            {$categoryCode}\r\n";
                echo "   - Tax type code:                {$typeCode}\r\n";
                echo "   - Tax percent:                  {$rateApplicablePercent}\r\n";
                echo "   - Tax amount:                   {$calculatedAmount}\r\n";
            } while ($document->nextDocumentPositionTax());
        }

        if ($document->firstDocumentPositionAllowanceCharge()) {
            echo " - Position Allowance(s)/Charge(s)\r\n";
            do {
                $document->getDocumentPositionAllowanceCharge($actualAmount, $isCharge, $calculationPercent, $basisAmount, $reason, $taxTypeCode, $taxCategoryCode, $rateApplicablePercent, $sequence, $basisQuantity, $basisQuantityUnitCode, $reasonCode);
                echo "   - Information\r\n";
                echo "     - Actual Amount:                {$actualAmount}\r\n";
                echo "     - Type:                         " . ($isCharge ? "Charge" : "Allowance") . "\r\n";
                echo "     - Tax category code:            {$taxCategoryCode}\r\n";
                echo "     - Tax type code:                {$taxTypeCode}\r\n";
                echo "     - Tax percent:                  {$rateApplicablePercent}\r\n";
                echo "     - Calculated percent:           {$calculationPercent}\r\n";
                echo "     - Basis amount:                 {$basisAmount}\r\n";
                echo "     - Basis qty.:                   {$basisQuantity} {$basisQuantityUnitCode}\r\n";
            } while ($document->nextDocumentPositionAllowanceCharge());
        }

        echo "\r\n";
    } while ($document->nextDocumentPosition());
}

if ($document->firstDocumentAllowanceCharge()) {
    echo "\r\nDocument allowance(s)/charge(s)\r\n";
    echo "----------------------------------------------------------------------\r\n";
    do {
        $document->getDocumentAllowanceCharge($actualAmount, $isCharge, $taxCategoryCode, $taxTypeCode, $rateApplicablePercent, $sequence, $calculationPercent, $basisAmount, $basisQuantity, $basisQuantityUnitCode, $reasonCode, $reason);
        echo "   - Information\r\n";
        echo "     - Actual Amount:                {$actualAmount}\r\n";
        echo "     - Type:                         " . ($isCharge ? "Charge" : "Allowance") . "\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax category code:            {$taxCategoryCode}\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax type code:                {$taxTypeCode}\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax percent:                  {$rateApplicablePercent}\r\n";
        echo "     - Calculated percent:           {$calculationPercent}\r\n";
        echo "     - Basis amount:                 {$basisAmount}\r\n";
        echo "     - Basis qty.:                   {$basisQuantity} {$basisQuantityUnitCode}\r\n";
    } while ($document->nextDocumentAllowanceCharge());
}

if ($document->firstDocumentTax()) {
    echo "\r\nDocument tax\r\n";
    echo "----------------------------------------------------------------------\r\n";
    do {
        $document->getDocumentTax($categoryCode, $typeCode, $basisAmount, $calculatedAmount, $rateApplicablePercent, $exemptionReason, $exemptionReasonCode, $lineTotalBasisAmount, $allowanceChargeBasisAmount, $taxPointDate, $dueDateTypeCode);
        echo "   - Information\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax category code:            {$categoryCode}\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax type code:                {$typeCode}\r\n";
        echo "     - Basis amount:                 {$basisAmount}\r\n";
        echo "     - Line total Basis amount:      {$lineTotalBasisAmount}\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax percent:                  {$rateApplicablePercent}\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax amount:                   {$calculatedAmount}\r\n";
    } while ($document->nextDocumentTax());
}

$document->getDocumentSummation($grandTotalAmount, $duePayableAmount, $lineTotalAmount, $chargeTotalAmount, $allowanceTotalAmount, $taxBasisTotalAmount, $taxTotalAmount, $roundingAmount, $totalPrepaidAmount);

echo "\r\nDocument summation\r\n";
echo "----------------------------------------------------------------------\r\n";

echo "  - Line total amount                {$lineTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Charge total amount              {$chargeTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Allowance total amount           {$allowanceTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Tax basis total amount           {$taxBasisTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Tax total amount                 {$taxTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Grant total amount               {$grandTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Due payable amount               {$duePayableAmount}\r\n";
```

### Reading a pdf file with xml attachment

Reading invoice data from a PDF is similar: you just need to use the `ZugferdDocumentPdfReader` class instead of `ZugferdDocumentReader`:

```php
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdDocumentPdfReader;

  $document = ZugferdDocumentPdfReader::readAndGuessFromFile(dirname(__FILE__) . "/xml/factur-x.pdf");
```

The further reading of the invoice data is then identical with [Reading a xml file](#reading-a-xml-file)

### Writing a xml file

The `ZugferdDocumentBuilder` class is again the central entry point to generate compliant XML data:

```php
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdDocumentBuilder;
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdProfiles;

  // Create an empty invoice document in the EN16931 profile
  $document = ZugferdDocumentBuilder::CreateNew(ZugferdProfiles::PROFILE_EN16931);

  // Add invoice and position information
  $document
    ->setDocumentInformation("471102", "380", \DateTime::createFromFormat("Ymd", "20180305"), "EUR")
    ->addDocumentNote('Rechnung gemäß Bestellung vom 01.03.2018.')
    ->setDocumentSupplyChainEvent(\DateTime::createFromFormat('Ymd', '20180305'))
    ->setDocumentSeller("Lieferant GmbH", "549910")
    ->addDocumentSellerGlobalId("4000001123452", "0088")
    ->addDocumentSellerTaxRegistration("FC", "201/113/40209")
    ->addDocumentSellerTaxRegistration("VA", "DE123456789")
    ->setDocumentSellerAddress("Lieferantenstraße 20", "", "", "80333", "München", "DE")
    ->setDocumentBuyer("Kunden AG Mitte", "GE2020211")
    ->setDocumentBuyerAddress("Kundenstraße 15", "", "", "69876", "Frankfurt", "DE")
    ->addDocumentTax("S", "VAT", 275.0, 19.25, 7.0)
    ->addDocumentTax("S", "VAT", 198.0, 37.02, 19.0)
    ->setDocumentSummation(529.87, 529.87, 473.00, 0.0, 0.0, 473.00, 56.87, null, 0.0)
    ->addDocumentPaymentTerm("Zahlbar innerhalb 30 Tagen netto bis 04.04.2018, 3% Skonto innerhalb 10 Tagen bis 15.03.2018")
    ->addNewPosition("1")
    ->setDocumentPositionProductDetails("Trennblätter A4", "", "TB100A4", null, "0160", "4012345001235")
    ->setDocumentPositionGrossPrice(9.9000)
    ->setDocumentPositionNetPrice(9.9000)
    ->setDocumentPositionQuantity(20, "H87")
    ->addDocumentPositionTax('S', 'VAT', 19)
    ->setDocumentPositionLineSummation(198.0)
    ->addNewPosition("2")
    ->setDocumentPositionProductDetails("Joghurt Banane", "", "ARNR2", null, "0160", "4000050986428")
    ->SetDocumentPositionGrossPrice(5.5000)
    ->SetDocumentPositionNetPrice(5.5000)
    ->SetDocumentPositionQuantity(50, "H87")
    ->AddDocumentPositionTax('S', 'VAT', 7)
    ->SetDocumentPositionLineSummation(275.0)
    ->writeFile(getcwd() . "/factur-x.xml");
```

### Writing a pdf file with attached xml file

```php
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdDocumentBuilder;
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdDocumentPdfBuilder;
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdProfiles;

  // Create an empty invoice document in the EN16931 profile
  $document = ZugferdDocumentBuilder::CreateNew(ZugferdProfiles::PROFILE_EN16931);

  // Add invoice and position information
  $document
    ->setDocumentInformation("471102", "380", \DateTime::createFromFormat("Ymd", "20180305"), "EUR")
    ->addDocumentNote('Rechnung gemäß Bestellung vom 01.03.2018.')
    ->setDocumentSupplyChainEvent(\DateTime::createFromFormat('Ymd', '20180305'))
    ->setDocumentSeller("Lieferant GmbH", "549910")
    ->addDocumentSellerGlobalId("4000001123452", "0088")
    ->addDocumentSellerTaxRegistration("FC", "201/113/40209")
    ->addDocumentSellerTaxRegistration("VA", "DE123456789")
    ->setDocumentSellerAddress("Lieferantenstraße 20", "", "", "80333", "München", "DE")
    ->setDocumentBuyer("Kunden AG Mitte", "GE2020211")
    ->setDocumentBuyerAddress("Kundenstraße 15", "", "", "69876", "Frankfurt", "DE")
    ->addDocumentTax("S", "VAT", 275.0, 19.25, 7.0)
    ->addDocumentTax("S", "VAT", 198.0, 37.02, 19.0)
    ->setDocumentSummation(529.87, 529.87, 473.00, 0.0, 0.0, 473.00, 56.87, null, 0.0)
    ->addDocumentPaymentTerm("Zahlbar innerhalb 30 Tagen netto bis 04.04.2018, 3% Skonto innerhalb 10 Tagen bis 15.03.2018")
    ->addNewPosition("1")
    ->setDocumentPositionProductDetails("Trennblätter A4", "", "TB100A4", null, "0160", "4012345001235")
    ->setDocumentPositionGrossPrice(9.9000)
    ->setDocumentPositionNetPrice(9.9000)
    ->setDocumentPositionQuantity(20, "H87")
    ->addDocumentPositionTax('S', 'VAT', 19)
    ->setDocumentPositionLineSummation(198.0)
    ->addNewPosition("2")
    ->setDocumentPositionProductDetails("Joghurt Banane", "", "ARNR2", null, "0160", "4000050986428")
    ->SetDocumentPositionGrossPrice(5.5000)
    ->SetDocumentPositionNetPrice(5.5000)
    ->SetDocumentPositionQuantity(50, "H87")
    ->AddDocumentPositionTax('S', 'VAT', 7)
    ->SetDocumentPositionLineSummation(275.0)
    ->writeFile(getcwd() . "/factur-x.xml");

  $pdfBuilder = new ZugferdDocumentPdfBuilder($document, "/tmp/original.pdf");
  $pdfBuilder->generateDocument();
  $pdfBuilder->saveDocument("/tmp/new.pdf");
```

Commit message:

Show supported profiles in README.md

README.md, after:

# ZUGFeRD/XRechnung/Factur-X

[![Latest Stable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/horstoeko/zugferd/v/stable.png)](https://packagist.org/packages/horstoeko/zugferd) [![Total Downloads](https://poser.pugx.org/horstoeko/zugferd/downloads.png)](https://packagist.org/packages/horstoeko/zugferd) [![Latest Unstable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/horstoeko/zugferd/v/unstable.png)](https://packagist.org/packages/horstoeko/zugferd) [![License](https://poser.pugx.org/horstoeko/zugferd/license.png)](https://packagist.org/packages/horstoeko/zugferd) [![Gitter](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)](https://gitter.im/horstoeko/zugferd)

[![CI (Ant, PHP 7.3)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php73.ant.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php73.ant.yml) [![CI (Ant, PHP 7.4)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php74.ant.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php74.ant.yml) [![CI (PHP 8.0)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php80.ant.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php80.ant.yml) [![CI (PHP 8.1)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php81.ant.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/actions/workflows/build.php81.ant.yml)

## Table of Contents

- [ZUGFeRD/XRechnung/Factur-X](#zugferdxrechnungfactur-x)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [License](#license)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Supported profiles](#supported-profiles)
  - [Further information](#further-information)
  - [Dependencies](#dependencies)
  - [Installation](#installation)
  - [Usage](#usage)
    - [Configuration](#configuration)
    - [Reading a xml file](#reading-a-xml-file)
    - [Reading a pdf file with xml attachment](#reading-a-pdf-file-with-xml-attachment)
    - [Writing a xml file](#writing-a-xml-file)
    - [Writing a pdf file with attached xml file](#writing-a-pdf-file-with-attached-xml-file)

## License

The code in this project is provided under the [MIT](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT) license.

## Overview

With `horstoeko/zugferd` you can read and write xml files containing electronic invoice data in the Minimum-, Basic-, EN16931-, Extended- and XRechnung Profile. In addition, it is possible to attach the XML data to an existing PDF file, which was created from an ERP system, for example. If both an XML file (or XML string) and a PDF file (or a PDF in the form of a string) exist, then a compliant PDF file with attachment can be created using the `ZugferdDocumentPdfMerger` class.

**The advantage of this library is that you don't have to worry about whether a particular XML element exists in a desired profile - you can use the same program code for all supported profiles.**

## Supported profiles

- EN16931 Minimum
- EN16931 Basic
- EN16931 Basic WL
- EN16931 Comfort
- EN16931 Extended
- EN16931 XRechnung 1.x
- EN16931 XRechnung 2.x
- EN16931 XRechnung 3.x

**Note: This package provides only support for CII - not UBL**

## Further information

* [ZUGFeRD](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZUGFeRD) (German)
* [XRechnung](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/XRechnung) (German)
* [Factur-X](http://fnfe-mpe.org/factur-x/factur-x_en) (France)

## Dependencies

This package makes use of

- [JMS Serializer](http://jmsyst.com/libs/serializer)
- [Xsd2Php](https://github.com/goetas-webservices/xsd2php)
- [FPDF](https://github.com/Setasign/FPDF)
- [FPDI](https://github.com/Setasign/FPDI).

## Installation

There is one recommended way to install `horstoeko/zugferd` via [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/):

* adding the dependency to your ``composer.json`` file:

```js
  "require": {
      ..
      "horstoeko/zugferd":"^1",
      ..
  },
```

## Usage

For detailed eplanation you may have a look in the [examples](https://github.com/horstoeko/zugferd/tree/master/examples) of this package and the documentation attached to every release.

### Configuration

By means of the `ZugferdSettings` class it is possible to control various options for XML and PDF generation:

```php
public static function getAmountDecimals(): int
```

Returns the currently configured number of decimal places for amount fields _(Default: 2)_.

```php
public static function setAmountDecimals(int $amountDecimals): void
```

Set the number of decimal places for amount fields.

```php
public static function getQuantityDecimals(): int
```

Returns the currently configured number of decimal places for quantity fields _(Default: 2)_.

```php
public static function setQuantityDecimals(int $quantityDecimals): void
```

Set the number of decimal places for quantity fields.

```php
public static function getPercentDecimals(): int
```

Returns the currently configured number of decimal places for percentage fields _(Default: 2)_.

```php
public static function setPercentDecimals(int $percentDecimals): void
```

Set the number of decimal places for percentage fields.

```php
public static function getDecimalSeparator(): string
```

Returns the currently configured character for the decimal separator. _(Default: .)

```php
public static function setDecimalSeparator(string $decimalSeparator): void
```

Set the character to use as the decimal separator.

```php
public static function getThousandsSeparator(): string
```

Returns the currently configured character for the thousands separator. _(Default: Empty)_

```php
public static function setThousandsSeparator(string $thousandsSeparator): void
```

Set the character to use as the thousands separator.

### Reading a xml file

The central entry point to read XML data is the class `ZugferdDocumentReader`. Among other things, this provides methods for reading header and line information, as can be seen in the following example:

```php
use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdDocumentReader;

$document = ZugferdDocumentReader::readAndGuessFromFile(dirname(__FILE__) . "/xml/factur-x.xml");

$document->getDocumentInformation($documentno, $documenttypecode, $documentdate, $invoiceCurrency, $taxCurrency, $documentname, $documentlanguage, $effectiveSpecifiedPeriod);

echo "\r\nGeneral document information\r\n";
echo "----------------------------------------------------------------------\r\n";
echo "Profile:               {$document->profileDefinition["name"]}\r\n";
echo "Profile:               {$document->profileDefinition["altname"]}\r\n";
echo "Document No:           {$documentno}\r\n";
echo "Document Type:         {$documenttypecode}\r\n";
echo "Document Date:         {$documentdate->format("Y-m-d")}\r\n";
echo "Invoice currency:      {$invoiceCurrency}\r\n";
echo "Tax currency:          {$taxCurrency}\r\n";

if ($document->firstDocumentPosition()) {
    echo "\r\nDocument positions\r\n";
    echo "----------------------------------------------------------------------\r\n";
    do {
        $document->getDocumentPositionGenerals($lineid, $linestatuscode, $linestatusreasoncode);
        $document->getDocumentPositionProductDetails($prodname, $proddesc, $prodsellerid, $prodbuyerid, $prodglobalidtype, $prodglobalid);
        $document->getDocumentPositionGrossPrice($grosspriceamount, $grosspricebasisquantity, $grosspricebasisquantityunitcode);
        $document->getDocumentPositionNetPrice($netpriceamount, $netpricebasisquantity, $netpricebasisquantityunitcode);
        $document->getDocumentPositionLineSummation($lineTotalAmount, $totalAllowanceChargeAmount);
        $document->getDocumentPositionQuantity($billedquantity, $billedquantityunitcode, $chargeFreeQuantity, $chargeFreeQuantityunitcode, $packageQuantity, $packageQuantityunitcode);

        echo " - Line Id:                        {$lineid}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Name:                   {$prodname}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Description:            {$proddesc}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Buyer ID:               {$prodbuyerid}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Gross Price:            {$grosspriceamount}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Gross Price Basis Qty.: {$grosspricebasisquantity} {$grosspricebasisquantityunitcode}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Net Price:              {$netpriceamount}\r\n";
        echo " - Product Net Price Basis Qty.:   {$netpricebasisquantity} {$netpricebasisquantityunitcode}\r\n";
        echo " - Quantity:                       {$billedquantity} {$billedquantityunitcode}\r\n";
        echo " - Line amount:                    {$lineTotalAmount}\r\n";

        if ($document->firstDocumentPositionTax()) {
            echo " - Position Tax(es)\r\n";
            do {
                $document->getDocumentPositionTax($categoryCode, $typeCode, $rateApplicablePercent, $calculatedAmount, $exemptionReason, $exemptionReasonCode);
                echo "   - Tax category code:            {$categoryCode}\r\n";
                echo "   - Tax type code:                {$typeCode}\r\n";
                echo "   - Tax percent:                  {$rateApplicablePercent}\r\n";
                echo "   - Tax amount:                   {$calculatedAmount}\r\n";
            } while ($document->nextDocumentPositionTax());
        }

        if ($document->firstDocumentPositionAllowanceCharge()) {
            echo " - Position Allowance(s)/Charge(s)\r\n";
            do {
                $document->getDocumentPositionAllowanceCharge($actualAmount, $isCharge, $calculationPercent, $basisAmount, $reason, $taxTypeCode, $taxCategoryCode, $rateApplicablePercent, $sequence, $basisQuantity, $basisQuantityUnitCode, $reasonCode);
                echo "   - Information\r\n";
                echo "     - Actual Amount:                {$actualAmount}\r\n";
                echo "     - Type:                         " . ($isCharge ? "Charge" : "Allowance") . "\r\n";
                echo "     - Tax category code:            {$taxCategoryCode}\r\n";
                echo "     - Tax type code:                {$taxTypeCode}\r\n";
                echo "     - Tax percent:                  {$rateApplicablePercent}\r\n";
                echo "     - Calculated percent:           {$calculationPercent}\r\n";
                echo "     - Basis amount:                 {$basisAmount}\r\n";
                echo "     - Basis qty.:                   {$basisQuantity} {$basisQuantityUnitCode}\r\n";
            } while ($document->nextDocumentPositionAllowanceCharge());
        }

        echo "\r\n";
    } while ($document->nextDocumentPosition());
}

if ($document->firstDocumentAllowanceCharge()) {
    echo "\r\nDocument allowance(s)/charge(s)\r\n";
    echo "----------------------------------------------------------------------\r\n";
    do {
        $document->getDocumentAllowanceCharge($actualAmount, $isCharge, $taxCategoryCode, $taxTypeCode, $rateApplicablePercent, $sequence, $calculationPercent, $basisAmount, $basisQuantity, $basisQuantityUnitCode, $reasonCode, $reason);
        echo "   - Information\r\n";
        echo "     - Actual Amount:                {$actualAmount}\r\n";
        echo "     - Type:                         " . ($isCharge ? "Charge" : "Allowance") . "\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax category code:            {$taxCategoryCode}\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax type code:                {$taxTypeCode}\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax percent:                  {$rateApplicablePercent}\r\n";
        echo "     - Calculated percent:           {$calculationPercent}\r\n";
        echo "     - Basis amount:                 {$basisAmount}\r\n";
        echo "     - Basis qty.:                   {$basisQuantity} {$basisQuantityUnitCode}\r\n";
    } while ($document->nextDocumentAllowanceCharge());
}

if ($document->firstDocumentTax()) {
    echo "\r\nDocument tax\r\n";
    echo "----------------------------------------------------------------------\r\n";
    do {
        $document->getDocumentTax($categoryCode, $typeCode, $basisAmount, $calculatedAmount, $rateApplicablePercent, $exemptionReason, $exemptionReasonCode, $lineTotalBasisAmount, $allowanceChargeBasisAmount, $taxPointDate, $dueDateTypeCode);
        echo "   - Information\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax category code:            {$categoryCode}\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax type code:                {$typeCode}\r\n";
        echo "     - Basis amount:                 {$basisAmount}\r\n";
        echo "     - Line total Basis amount:      {$lineTotalBasisAmount}\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax percent:                  {$rateApplicablePercent}\r\n";
        echo "     - Tax amount:                   {$calculatedAmount}\r\n";
    } while ($document->nextDocumentTax());
}

$document->getDocumentSummation($grandTotalAmount, $duePayableAmount, $lineTotalAmount, $chargeTotalAmount, $allowanceTotalAmount, $taxBasisTotalAmount, $taxTotalAmount, $roundingAmount, $totalPrepaidAmount);

echo "\r\nDocument summation\r\n";
echo "----------------------------------------------------------------------\r\n";

echo "  - Line total amount                {$lineTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Charge total amount              {$chargeTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Allowance total amount           {$allowanceTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Tax basis total amount           {$taxBasisTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Tax total amount                 {$taxTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Grant total amount               {$grandTotalAmount}\r\n";
echo "  - Due payable amount               {$duePayableAmount}\r\n";
```

### Reading a pdf file with xml attachment

Reading invoice data from a PDF is similar: you just need to use the `ZugferdDocumentPdfReader` class instead of `ZugferdDocumentReader`:

```php
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdDocumentPdfReader;

  $document = ZugferdDocumentPdfReader::readAndGuessFromFile(dirname(__FILE__) . "/xml/factur-x.pdf");
```

The further reading of the invoice data is then identical with [Reading a xml file](#reading-a-xml-file)

### Writing a xml file

The `ZugferdDocumentBuilder` class is again the central entry point to generate compliant XML data:

```php
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdDocumentBuilder;
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdProfiles;

  // Create an empty invoice document in the EN16931 profile
  $document = ZugferdDocumentBuilder::CreateNew(ZugferdProfiles::PROFILE_EN16931);

  // Add invoice and position information
  $document
    ->setDocumentInformation("471102", "380", \DateTime::createFromFormat("Ymd", "20180305"), "EUR")
    ->addDocumentNote('Rechnung gemäß Bestellung vom 01.03.2018.')
    ->setDocumentSupplyChainEvent(\DateTime::createFromFormat('Ymd', '20180305'))
    ->setDocumentSeller("Lieferant GmbH", "549910")
    ->addDocumentSellerGlobalId("4000001123452", "0088")
    ->addDocumentSellerTaxRegistration("FC", "201/113/40209")
    ->addDocumentSellerTaxRegistration("VA", "DE123456789")
    ->setDocumentSellerAddress("Lieferantenstraße 20", "", "", "80333", "München", "DE")
    ->setDocumentBuyer("Kunden AG Mitte", "GE2020211")
    ->setDocumentBuyerAddress("Kundenstraße 15", "", "", "69876", "Frankfurt", "DE")
    ->addDocumentTax("S", "VAT", 275.0, 19.25, 7.0)
    ->addDocumentTax("S", "VAT", 198.0, 37.02, 19.0)
    ->setDocumentSummation(529.87, 529.87, 473.00, 0.0, 0.0, 473.00, 56.87, null, 0.0)
    ->addDocumentPaymentTerm("Zahlbar innerhalb 30 Tagen netto bis 04.04.2018, 3% Skonto innerhalb 10 Tagen bis 15.03.2018")
    ->addNewPosition("1")
    ->setDocumentPositionProductDetails("Trennblätter A4", "", "TB100A4", null, "0160", "4012345001235")
    ->setDocumentPositionGrossPrice(9.9000)
    ->setDocumentPositionNetPrice(9.9000)
    ->setDocumentPositionQuantity(20, "H87")
    ->addDocumentPositionTax('S', 'VAT', 19)
    ->setDocumentPositionLineSummation(198.0)
    ->addNewPosition("2")
    ->setDocumentPositionProductDetails("Joghurt Banane", "", "ARNR2", null, "0160", "4000050986428")
    ->SetDocumentPositionGrossPrice(5.5000)
    ->SetDocumentPositionNetPrice(5.5000)
    ->SetDocumentPositionQuantity(50, "H87")
    ->AddDocumentPositionTax('S', 'VAT', 7)
    ->SetDocumentPositionLineSummation(275.0)
    ->writeFile(getcwd() . "/factur-x.xml");
```

### Writing a pdf file with attached xml file

```php
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdDocumentBuilder;
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdDocumentPdfBuilder;
  use horstoeko\zugferd\ZugferdProfiles;

  // Create an empty invoice document in the EN16931 profile
  $document = ZugferdDocumentBuilder::CreateNew(ZugferdProfiles::PROFILE_EN16931);

  // Add invoice and position information
  $document
    ->setDocumentInformation("471102", "380", \DateTime::createFromFormat("Ymd", "20180305"), "EUR")
    ->addDocumentNote('Rechnung gemäß Bestellung vom 01.03.2018.')
    ->setDocumentSupplyChainEvent(\DateTime::createFromFormat('Ymd', '20180305'))
    ->setDocumentSeller("Lieferant GmbH", "549910")
    ->addDocumentSellerGlobalId("4000001123452", "0088")
    ->addDocumentSellerTaxRegistration("FC", "201/113/40209")
    ->addDocumentSellerTaxRegistration("VA", "DE123456789")
    ->setDocumentSellerAddress("Lieferantenstraße 20", "", "", "80333", "München", "DE")
    ->setDocumentBuyer("Kunden AG Mitte", "GE2020211")
    ->setDocumentBuyerAddress("Kundenstraße 15", "", "", "69876", "Frankfurt", "DE")
    ->addDocumentTax("S", "VAT", 275.0, 19.25, 7.0)
    ->addDocumentTax("S", "VAT", 198.0, 37.02, 19.0)
    ->setDocumentSummation(529.87, 529.87, 473.00, 0.0, 0.0, 473.00, 56.87, null, 0.0)
    ->addDocumentPaymentTerm("Zahlbar innerhalb 30 Tagen netto bis 04.04.2018, 3% Skonto innerhalb 10 Tagen bis 15.03.2018")
    ->addNewPosition("1")
    ->setDocumentPositionProductDetails("Trennblätter A4", "", "TB100A4", null, "0160", "4012345001235")
    ->setDocumentPositionGrossPrice(9.9000)
    ->setDocumentPositionNetPrice(9.9000)
    ->setDocumentPositionQuantity(20, "H87")
    ->addDocumentPositionTax('S', 'VAT', 19)
    ->setDocumentPositionLineSummation(198.0)
    ->addNewPosition("2")
    ->setDocumentPositionProductDetails("Joghurt Banane", "", "ARNR2", null, "0160", "4000050986428")
    ->SetDocumentPositionGrossPrice(5.5000)
    ->SetDocumentPositionNetPrice(5.5000)
    ->SetDocumentPositionQuantity(50, "H87")
    ->AddDocumentPositionTax('S', 'VAT', 7)
    ->SetDocumentPositionLineSummation(275.0)
    ->writeFile(getcwd() . "/factur-x.xml");

  $pdfBuilder = new ZugferdDocumentPdfBuilder($document, "/tmp/original.pdf");
  $pdfBuilder->generateDocument();
  $pdfBuilder->saveDocument("/tmp/new.pdf");
```
